GAI and the Rise of the New Community Bank

So, it’s not a community bank AI agent that outcompetes a big bank, but a human agent amplified by AI which provides a level of service most consumers still want. 

I’m assuming by “local one-bank branch” they mean community banks?  A couple thoughts from me, but I’ll say that right now we're a bit far from real customer-facing examples of GAI in banking. Most everything being done are flashy demos or cool toys built out by R&D teams--most of the value is being realized internally as a productivity tool. There are still some significant barriers to overcome before GAI becomes part of core products/services—but it’ll happen eventually.  Unfortunately, I think larger banks, fintech, and big tech will see value from GAI long before community banks.  For FS the differentiation will come from fine-tuning models on a proprietary data. Those with the most data can build the biggest moat.  You also have tons of investment and hiring here by the top banks.  I’m not sure you’ll see many customer-facing GAI examples in small banks that don’t exist elsewhere first.
To me, community banks need to rethink where their moats exist today and how those can be amplified by GAI to build a sustainable competitive advantage. They’re likely in niches not well served by big banks, e.g. Ag lending and SME lending, serving under-served communities, serving niche consumer segments. It could be by focusing all their energy on serving customer needs within a specific product or journey, e.g. auto.  GAI then acts as a productivity tool to serve these niches, adding operational leverage. So it’s not a community bank AI agent that outcompetes a big bank, but a human agent amplified by AI which provides a level of service most consumers still want.
On the mortgage side I’ll leave that to Naeem or others to comment, but the first things that comes to mind are around synthesizing information, particularly during the shopping stage (analyzing rates, insurance, utilities, taxes, neighborhood stats, etc.), and personal assistants to guide through the process (document submission, data validations).
