Revisiting VR/AR in banking: Will COVID-19 affect adoption?
A recent conversation with a colleague got us thinking about VR/AR in banking and the potential effects of the pandemic. Needless to say, it’s been a while since the initial hype. While the technology is nothing new, the release of Google Glass in 2013 created mainstream interest and brought on a range of predictions around industry disruption. I wasn’t until 2016 that the tech really took off, validated by the release of Oculus, PSVR, HTC Vive, and Microsoft Hololens.  Almost immediately large banks began to test and learn, releasing concept videos around proof of concepts (POCs).
But almost as quickly as these initial projects flooded headlines and social media in retail banking, they seemed to fade into the background as newer and arguably more tangibly valuable technologies took center stage. A good portion of motivation behind the splashy, headline-grabbing POCs seemed PR-related rather than business-driven (like some emerging tech of the last 5-10 years—think wearables, IoT, beacons, Pepper the robot, even advanced AI).  While there was some useful testing and learning going on, many of these ideas were moon shots.
In the last 18 months, the pandemic added extra emphasis to digitization initiatives, and retail banks in a Celent survey claim COVID-19 accelerated digital transformation strategies by two years.  But even during a time in which consumers are stuck at home and physical contact/proximity has been discouraged or prohibited, VR/AR has still not had its day. Consumers didn’t look to VR for the outdoor experiences they were missing while sitting inside. In banking, going digital/touchless was mostly seen in payments, with massive declines in cash utilization accompanied by growth in P2P and contactless payments. The technology is still “on the horizon,” stuck in the realm of niche industry applications or a small number of games. (Playstation, as of last year had only sold 5 million devices for the PS4, which is short of the 6 million they projected would be sold in 2016 alone.)
 
It’s clear that AR/VR in banking is still struggling to find adoption. But why? We thought it was worth revisiting a few of the reasons VR/AR has struggled to find its place in the retail banking ecosystem:
•	VR can be expensive, especially for enterprise editions.  Consumer adoption has been lower, and banks have been reluctant to spend $3-5k per headset unless there’s obvious value.
•	There isn’t the developer community you have for other channels/engagement mechanisms (e.g. mobile banking), so it’s difficult to find people to build/maintain applications.
•	The value proposition over tradition methods of engagement in banking is not very clear. For example, a few of the initial AR POCs in 2016/17 involved making payments through a device where you would point at a person or an object and a payment option would appear. Like many other AR/VR use cases, this could just as easily be done through a mobile UI (and likely much easier to build/maintain).
•	The technology is still maturing, and while it will undoubtedly get better over time, some of the initial forays didn’t quite live up to the hype (some causing dizziness or even existential crises!).

There’s another angle here too in which bank investment priorities for digital engagement are shifting towards more personalization. As a colleague Bob Meara explored in his most recent report, Digital Customer Engagement Platforms and the accompanying webinar, “banks are already heavily invested in digital banking. For the most part, this has been about convenient, low-friction transaction enablement – self-service. Further investment in personalization is a growth area, particularly as it relates to timely, relevant, non-sales related proactive customer engagement. AI and ML is driving this capability. Along the way though, banks are realizing that they are losing connection with customers. “Personalized” doesn’t necessarily equate to relationship. As such, banks are slowly waking up to the need to make human-to-human assisted service more convenient and responsive to customers and do it in a scalable way. Umpqua Go-To was an early example of a bank going “all-in” on human digital.”
There may be a time when AR/VR takes off in retail banking, but it’s been “right around the corner” for years now.  For the moment it’s a solution looking for a problem, a solution which doesn’t quite align with where banks are taking digital customer engagement or channels.
Of course, anything can happen, and trends can shift overnight.  Remember how quickly AR adoption skyrocketed with Pokemon Go in 2016 (the game was downloaded 750 million times in the first year!).  Apple has also been betting on AR for a while, looking at embedding it into the iPhone with lidar sensors and even unveiling its own headset sometime in the future. 
As with many emerging technologies, the hype focuses on the possibilities, not the current maturity. COVID-19 has impacted consumer adoption of digital and accelerated digitization timelines for many banks. While right now the pandemic hasn’t impacted the adoption of AR/VR in banking, big moves from Apple, Facebook, Microsoft, or Magic Leap could push the technology mainstream. Banks should continue to focus on the experiences which matter to the user and reinforce investments made into creating more open and flexible applications. If AR/VR does take off, its much easier to envision use cases which involve embedding financial services into existing applications, think BNPL or payments initiation. Retail banking is unlikely to create the killer app which drives adoption, but they can be quick to adapt to emerging customer demands. 

ADD GOGLE TRENDS: 
https://trends.google.com/trends/explore?geo=US&q=VR,Virtual%20reality,oculus,%2Fm%2F0lqtr 






